---
title: On Gentrification in Cleveland
---
#### I: Forethought 
What is the purpose of the city? We can think of some things it ought to do: house people, host their places of work, play, and leisure, and facilitate transportation to and from these various places, etc. Making and implementing polices that shape those features are the traditional tasks of planning agencies, transit authorities and coordinating agencies (for instance, NOACA). But land use, zoning, and transit planning are not *ends* in themselves, instead, they are means. Answers to policy questions that shape the built environment arise only after we have thought about what our cities are *for.* And that makes their answers political and ideological. The answers, then, to questions like, "Where should we build housing, and what type should we build?" (if, indeed, we ought to build housing at all), "How should people get around?," etc. are predicated on thornier questions, like "Who belongs?", "What, if anything, is our responsibility to one another?", and "What is the proper relationship between government and the market?" The centrality of these questions can sometimes get obscured in discussions about urban policy that often center on specific policy debates before thinking about the goals of such policies.  I am guided in this line of thinking by the 1979 *Policy Planning Report* of Cleveland, Ohio, led by Norman Krumholz. That document articulates a new goal for planning: 

>Equity requires that locally-responsible government institutions give priority attention to the goal of promoting a wider range of choices for those Cleveland residents who have few, if any, choices. [^1]

The report provides an extensive justification for itself, including references to Plato, Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, John Rawls, and the Bible. In doing so, it departs significantly from any official planning document previously produced. But its clearly ideological bent is its strength. Its goal is not to be a map of different colored spots of land indicating what might be built where; Instead, it answers the deeper questions of *what planning is for.* Norman Krumholz was guided by the recognition that Cleveland's metropolitan area was among the most segregated and unequal in the nation.[^2] The exodus of wealth from the urban to sub- and exurban areas of greater Cleveland continues to present the greatest challenge to addressing the problems of substandard housing, poor health outcomes, crime, poverty, etc. But Krumholz envisioned a role for planning to strike out on a quest to build a more equitable society, even if it didn't have other institutional backers for such an effort. Its instruments were influence in the particular areas of policy it had credibility:  housing, zoning, transportation, etc. Today, many of the same problems remain, but the particular neighborhoods subject to disinvestment or the problems presented by demand pressures have changed. 

The report shows the state of Cleveland' housing markets in 1973: 

{% include figure popup=true image_path="/assets/images/Screenshot 2025-06-18 at 2.28.43 PM.png" alt="A map of Cleveland showing the housing markets by neighborhood. Certain inner neighborhoods have high vacancy and abandonment and below median rents, while others have stronger markets with above median rents." caption="Fig. IV in *The Cleveland Policy Planning Report.* Shows the state of housing markets by Cleveland neighborhood." %}

The following map shows the Neighborhood Development Index, developed by the City of Cleveland and Case Western Reserve University in 2022. This index was developed to determine the tax abatements offered for new housing developments (thorough description of the program [here](https://www.clevelandohio.gov/sites/clevelandohio/files/Community%20Development/FAQ-%20Tax%20Abatement.pdf)). There are three categories of neighborhoods under this analysis:

1. Market rate: New multi-family housing developments here receive an 85% property tax abatement, subject to certain restrictions like community benefits agreements, green building requirements, etc. These neighborhoods have seen substantial investment, higher sale and rental prices, lower vacancy and foreclosure rates, and higher incomes.
2. Middle-market: New multi-family housing developments here receive a 100% property tax abatement, subject to broadly similar requirements. These neighborhoods have older housing stock, and some foreclosure and demolition.
3. Opportunity: 100% property tax abatement, looser community benefit agreements. These neighborhoods have seen lower investment, substantial demolition and foreclosure, and lower incomes. 

We can identify some changes between these two maps. Detroit-Shoreway, Tremont, Ohio City, University Circle, and some parts of Midtown closer to downtown have shifted from being subject to disinvestment to facing demand pressures.

<arcgis-embedded-map style="height:600px;width:700px;" item-id="d048e049782440b7995cb938d798dbae" theme="light" heading-enabled legend-enabled share-enabled portal-url="https://cwru.maps.arcgis.com" ></arcgis-embedded-map>

The problems faced by areas seeing demand pressures are quite different from those faced by areas faced by areas of low demand (which, in turn, stem from the issue of poverty). In the *Cleveland Policy Planning Report*, Krumholz et al. propose tax abatements for new residential, commercial, and industrial development to address the problems of poverty in areas facing disinvestment.[^3] It also proposes stimulating demand for housing through housing subsidies and vouchers. [^4] But some members of successive generations of planners and urban advocates have, in my view, embarked on a misguided effort to prevent new development in urban areas that are currently being revitalized. That course of action, I think, stems from a misreading of Krumholz and his ilk that takes the goal of planning to be the preservation of urban communities as its primary goal at the expense of all others. Such an approach identifies new multifamily construction as the problem facing gentrifying neighborhoods. Is that framing helpful? [^5]
#### II. What gentrification and displacement are all about

#### III. 

[^1]:  Cleveland City Planning Commission, *The Cleveland Policy Planning Report*, 1973, [https://ecommons.cornell.edu/items/ca49d22c-76b7-4462-ab72-9faaf15d2815](https://ecommons.cornell.edu/items/ca49d22c-76b7-4462-ab72-9faaf15d2815), 9. 
[^2]: Cleveland City Planning Commission, *Policy Planning Report,* 12-13. 
[^3]: Cleveland City Planning Commission, *Policy Planning Report*, 22-24. 
[^4]: Cleveland City Planning Commission, *Policy Planning Report*, 27-29. 
[^5]: As an example of this feeling, in the Fall of 2024, I attended the Norm Krumholz Speaker Series. I don't want to start any fights, but one speaker railed against the new developments in the Flats as a prime example of the victory of capital over people and as a failure of city leadership to advocate for its people. I will contend in this post that such a framing, with development and developers as the enemy to be fought, is fundamentally unhelpful. 
